@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 
@c See the file elisp.texi for copying conditions.
@setfilename ../info/maps
@node Standard Keymaps, Standard Hooks, Standard Buffer-Local Variables, Top
@c @appendix Standard Keymaps
@appendix 標準のキーマップ

@c The following symbols are used as the names for various keymaps.
@c Some of these exist when Emacs is first started, others are
@c loaded only when their respective mode is used.  This is not
@c an exhaustive list.
以下のシンボルは、さまざまなキーマップの名前として使われています。
これらの一部はEmacsの始動時に存在しますが、
他のものは関連するモードを使ったときにのみロードされます。
以下は、完全な一覧ではありません。

@c Almost all of these maps are used as local maps.  Indeed, of the modes
@c that presently exist, only Vip mode and Terminal mode ever change the
@c global keymap.
これらのマップのほとんどすべては、ローカルマップとして使われます。
もちろん、存在するモードの中で、グローバルキーマップを変更するのは
Vipモードと端末（terminal）モードだけです。

@table @code
@item Buffer-menu-mode-map
@vindex Buffer-menu-mode-map
@c A full keymap used by Buffer Menu mode.
バッファメニュー（buffer-menu）モードで使う完全なキーマップ。

@item c-mode-map
@vindex c-mode-map
@c A sparse keymap used by C mode.
Cモードで使う疎なキーマップ。

@item command-history-map
@vindex command-history-map
@c A full keymap used by Command History mode.
コマンド履歴（command-history）モードで使う完全なキーマップ。

@item ctl-x-4-map
@c A sparse keymap for subcommands of the prefix @kbd{C-x 4}.
プレフィックス@kbd{C-x 4}の下位コマンド用の疎なキーマップ。

@item ctl-x-5-map
@c A sparse keymap for subcommands of the prefix @kbd{C-x 5}.
プレフィックス@kbd{C-x 5}の下位コマンド用の疎なキーマップ。

@item ctl-x-map
@c A full keymap for @kbd{C-x} commands.
@kbd{C-x}コマンド用の完全なキーマップ。

@item debugger-mode-map
@vindex debugger-mode-map
@c A full keymap used by Debugger mode.
デバッガモードで使う完全なキーマップ。

@item dired-mode-map
@vindex dired-mode-map
@c A full keymap for @code{dired-mode} buffers.
@code{dired-mode}バッファで使う完全なキーマップ。

@item edit-abbrevs-map
@vindex edit-abbrevs-map
@c A sparse keymap used in @code{edit-abbrevs}.
@code{edit-abbrevs}で使う疎なキーマップ。

@item edit-tab-stops-map
@vindex edit-tab-stops-map
@c A sparse keymap used in @code{edit-tab-stops}.
@code{edit-tab-stops}で使う疎なキーマップ。

@item electric-buffer-menu-mode-map
@vindex electric-buffer-menu-mode-map
@c A full keymap used by Electric Buffer Menu mode.
エレクトリックバッファメニュー（electric-buffer-menu）モードで
使う完全なキーマップ。

@item electric-history-map
@vindex electric-history-map
@c A full keymap used by Electric Command History mode.
エレクトリックコマンド履歴（electric-command-history）モードで
使う完全なキーマップ。

@item emacs-lisp-mode-map
@vindex emacs-lisp-mode-map
@c A sparse keymap used by Emacs Lisp mode.
emacs-lispモードで使う疎なキーマップ。

@item facemenu-menu
@vindex facemenu-menu
@c The keymap that displays the Text Properties menu.
テキスト属性メニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item facemenu-background-menu
@vindex facemenu-background-menu
@c The keymap that displays the Background Color submenu of the Text
@c Properties menu.
テキスト属性メニューのBackground Colorサブメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item facemenu-face-menu
@vindex facemenu-face-menu
@c The keymap that displays the Face submenu of the Text Properties menu.
テキスト属性メニューのFaceサブメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item facemenu-foreground-menu
@vindex facemenu-foreground-menu
@c The keymap that displays the Foreground Color submenu of the Text
@c Properties menu.
テキスト属性メニューのForeground Colorを表示するキーマップ。

@item facemenu-indentation-menu
@vindex facemenu-indentation-menu
@c The keymap that displays the Indentation submenu of the Text Properties menu.
テキスト属性メニューのIndentaionサブメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item facemenu-justification-menu
@vindex facemenu-justification-menu
@c The keymap that displays the Justification submenu of the Text
@c Properties menu.
テキスト属性メニューのJustificationサブメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item facemenu-special-menu
@vindex facemenu-special-menu
@c The keymap that displays the Special Props submenu of the Text
@c Properties menu.
テキスト属性メニューのSpecial Propsサブメニューを
表示するキーマップ。

@item function-key-map
@c The keymap for translating keypad and function keys.@*
@c If there are none, then it contains an empty sparse keymap.
@c @xref{Translating Input}.
キーパッドやファンクションキーの変換用のキーマップ。@*
それらがなければ、この変数は空の疎なキーマップである。
@pxref{Translating Input}。

@item fundamental-mode-map
@vindex fundamental-mode-map
@c The local keymap for Fundamental mode.@*
@c It is empty and should not be changed.
基本（fundamental）モード用のローカルキーマップ。@*
これは空であり、変更すべきでない。

@item Helper-help-map
@vindex Helper-help-map
@c A full keymap used by the help utility package.@*
@c It has the same keymap in its value cell and in its function
@c cell.
ヘルプユーティリティパッケージが使う完全なキーマップ。@*
この変数の値セルと関数セルには同一のキーマップが入っている。

@item Info-edit-map
@vindex Info-edit-map
@c A sparse keymap used by the @kbd{e} command of Info.
infoの@kbd{e}コマンドで使う疎なキーマップ。

@item Info-mode-map
@vindex Info-mode-map
@c A sparse keymap containing Info commands.
infoコマンドを収めた疎なキーマップ。

@item isearch-mode-map
@vindex isearch-mode-map
@c A keymap that defines the characters you can type within incremental
@c search.
インクリメンタルサーチ中に打鍵できる文字を定義するキーマップ。

@item key-translation-map
@c A keymap for translating keys.  This one overrides ordinary key
@c bindings, unlike @code{function-key-map}.  @xref{Translating Input}.
キー変換用のキーマップ。
これは、@code{function-key-map}と違って、
もとのキーバインディングに優先する。
@pxref{Translating Input}。

@item lisp-interaction-mode-map
@vindex lisp-interaction-mode-map
@c A sparse keymap used by Lisp mode.
Lispモードで使う疎なキーマップ。

@item lisp-mode-map
@vindex lisp-mode-map
@c A sparse keymap used by Lisp mode.
Lispモードで使う疎なキーマップ。

@item menu-bar-edit-menu
@vindex menu-bar-edit-menu
@c The keymap which displays the Edit menu in the menu bar.
メニューバーのEditメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item menu-bar-files-menu
@vindex menu-bar-files-menu
@c The keymap which displays the Files menu in the menu bar.
メニューバーのFilesメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item menu-bar-help-menu
@vindex menu-bar-help-menu
@c The keymap which displays the Help menu in the menu bar.
メニューバーのHelpメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item menu-bar-mule-menu
@tindex menu-bar-mule-menu
@vindex menu-bar-mule-menu
@c The keymap which displays the Mule menu in the menu bar.
メニューバーのMuleメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item menu-bar-search-menu
@vindex menu-bar-search-menu
@c The keymap which displays the Search menu in the menu bar.
メニューバーのSearchメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item menu-bar-tools-menu
@vindex menu-bar-tools-menu
@c The keymap which displays the Tools menu in the menu bar.
メニューバーのToolsメニューを表示するキーマップ。

@item mode-specific-map
@c The keymap for characters following @kbd{C-c}.  Note, this is in the
@c global map.  This map is not actually mode specific: its name was chosen
@c to be informative for the user in @kbd{C-h b} (@code{display-bindings}),
@c where it describes the main use of the @kbd{C-c} prefix key.
@kbd{C-c}に続く文字用のキーマップ。
これはグローバルマップの中にあることに注意。
このマップは実際にはモード固有ではない。
プレフィックスキー@kbd{C-c}の主要な使い方を記述する
@kbd{C-h b}（@code{display-bindings}）において、
ユーザーに有益なようにこの名前を選んだ。

@item occur-mode-map
@vindex occur-mode-map
@c A local keymap used by Occur mode.
出現（occur）モードで使うローカルキーマップ。

@item query-replace-map
@c A local keymap used for responses in @code{query-replace} and related
@c commands; also for @code{y-or-n-p} and @code{map-y-or-n-p}.  The functions
@c that use this map do not support prefix keys; they look up one event at a
@c time.
@code{query-replace}やその関連コマンドの応答用に使うキーマップ。
@code{y-or-n-p}や@code{map-y-or-n-p}もこれを使う。
このマップを使う関数は、プレフィックスキーを使わない。
一度に1つのイベントを探す。

@item text-mode-map
@vindex text-mode-map
@c A sparse keymap used by Text mode.
テキスト（text）モードで使う疎なキーマップ。

@item view-mode-map
@vindex view-mode-map
@c A full keymap used by View mode.
閲覧（view）モードで使う完全なキーマップ。
@end table
